docs: include server deployment in public documentation (#1109)
canonical/testflinger: docs/how-to/administer-server/deploy-testflinger-server.rst

.. _howto-deploy-server:

Deploy a Testflinger Server
===========================

This guide outlines the steps to deploy a Testflinger server using Juju and
the Testflinger server charm from Charmhub.

Testflinger server runs as a Kubernetes application and uses MongoDB as its
backend. In this guide, MongoDB is deployed as a machine charm and connected
to the server through a Juju cross-model relation. For more details, see the 
:doc:`../../explanation/architecture` explanation.

Prerequisites
-------------

The following prerequisites cover the necessary steps to set up K8s and
machine-based Juju environments required for the Testflinger server
deployment. For a detailed guide on how to set up Juju, refer to the
`official Juju documentation <https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/>`_.

Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install the following dependencies:

.. code-block:: shell

>   $ sudo apt-get install git

Reviewer: While we probably will use `git` I don't see where in this tutorial it is ever used.

  $ sudo snap install juju lxd
  $ sudo snap install microk8s --channel <latest_version>-strict
  $ sudo snap install terraform --classic

.. note::

  Juju requires the strict version of the ``microk8s`` snap to be installed.

LXD
^^^

Make sure LXD is initialized.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ lxd init --auto

.. note::

  Feel free to initialize LXD with a configuration that suits your needs.

MicroK8s
^^^^^^^^

The Testflinger server deployment depends on the following MicroK8s setup.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ sudo snap alias microk8s.kubectl kubectl
  $ sudo usermod -aG snap_microk8s ubuntu
  $ newgrp snap_microk8s  # or reboot

>   $ microk8s status --wait-ready

Reviewer: I got stuck at this point, probably should mention that 1 CPU and 1GiB of RAM is not enough -- the default settings for a new multipass environment -- I have now bumped that up to: 4 CPUs, 12GiB memory, 12GiB disk.

Author: I just added a note with recommended minimum requirements based on my local deployment. This adds also a note that this is just intended for testing/development purposes and that more robust requirements may be needed based on specific usage.

  $ sudo microk8s enable dns hostpath-storage ingress

Juju
^^^^

Set up the Juju controllers needed for the Testflinger server deployment.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ juju bootstrap localhost localhost-controller
  $ microk8s config | juju add-k8s localhost-microk8s --controller localhost-controller

Then create the models for the server and database deployments.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ juju add-model testflinger-db localhost
  $ juju add-model testflinger localhost-microk8s

MongoDB deployment
------------------

Deploy the MongoDB charm into the ``testflinger-db`` model.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ juju deploy mongodb --channel 6/stable -m testflinger-db

Once the deployment is complete, offer the MongoDB endpoint so that it can
be consumed by the Testflinger server application in the K8s model.
For more information on how to use Juju ``offer``, please refer to the 
`Juju offer CLI reference <Juju Offer_>`_.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ juju offer testflinger-db.mongodb:database mongodb

Testflinger server deployment
------------------------------

.. tip::

>   The next steps assume you are located in the k8s model, otherwise you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The next steps assume the k8s model is active, otherwise you can
```

The Juju documentation at https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/reference/juju-cli/list-of-juju-cli-commands/models/ suggests that the proper vernacular is to refer to the "active" model.

Deploy the Testflinger server charm.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ juju deploy testflinger-k8s --channel stable \
      --config jwt_signing_key="<signing-key>"

.. note::

  The ``jwt_signing_key`` configuration is required for authenticating
  API requests to the Testflinger server. You should generate a secure
  random string to use as the signing key.

.. note::

  You can also pass the ``-n <units>`` flag to deploy multiple units of the
  Testflinger server application. Adjust this number based on your needs
  and the resources available in your cluster.

Relate the Testflinger server application with the MongoDB endpoint.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ juju integrate testflinger-k8s:mongodb_client mongodb:database

Monitor the deployment progress until all units are active.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ juju status --storage --relations --watch 5s

Once all units are active, deploy and configure the ingress charm to
expose the Testflinger server API.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ juju deploy nginx-ingress-integrator --trust
  $ juju integrate nginx-ingress-integrator testflinger-k8s
  $ juju config testflinger-k8s external_hostname=testflinger.local

> The deployment finishes when the status shows ``Ingress IP(s): 127.0.0.1``

Reviewer: This never happened in my case.

Author: Yeah, the error was with microk8s >=1.35. I also added a note stating that this guide uses NGINX so it must remain on microk8s <1.35.

.. _howto-deploy-server:

Deploy a Testflinger Server
===========================

This guide outlines the steps to deploy a Testflinger server using Juju and
the Testflinger server charm from Charmhub.

Architecture
------------

The Testflinger server is a Kubernetes (K8s) application deployed using Juju.
As a backend, it uses a MongoDB database that stores all data related to
Testflinger, including job definitions, job results, agent information,
and more.

The preferred way to deploy MongoDB is to use the MongoDB machine charm,
which deploys a MongoDB instance on a virtual machine (VM). This can
improve performance and reduce resource complexity compared to deploying
MongoDB as a K8s application.

> The following diagram illustrates the architecture of the Testflinger

Reviewer 2: The architecture is useful context here, but this section feels a bit too explanatory for a how-to task. Would you consider moving most of the “Architecture” section to a new page (e.g.  “Architecture” under Explanations) and keeping only a short introductory paragraph here? something like:

> Testflinger server runs as a Kubernetes application and uses MongoDB as its backend. In this guide, MongoDB is deployed as a machine charm and connected to the server through a Juju cross-model relation. For more details, see [architecture page]

This could keep this page more focused on the required actions

Author: Added a dedicated page for `Architecture` please let me know what you think or if anything else should be added!

server deployment:

.. image:: ../../images/testflinger_architecture.svg
   :alt: Testflinger server architecture diagram

In the above diagram, there is a single `Juju Controller <Juju Controller_>`_ 
that manages both the K8s and machine `Juju models <Juju Model_>`_. 
In the machine model, only the MongoDB charm is deployed, while in the K8s

> model, the Testflinger server charm and the NGINX Ingress Integrator charm

Reviewer: NGINX

We don't know/specify that it has to be the NGINX integrator charm before this.

Are these "integrator"... or "ingress" charms automatically configured to do load balancing?  Do we link/refer to their configurations at all?

Author: Yes, afaik load balancing is automatic via ingress and Kubernetes. We don't configure anything on nginx charm (except for the TLS secret) and I think its the same for the Ingress Configurator charm. We only require to set the external_hostname in the testflinger server charm. 

I can make it more generalized and specify that for now, we are using the NGINX charm. Once we have more information about Ingress Configurator charm (and their setup) we can update the guide to recommend using this new one.

Author: This was now moved to its own page. In `explanation/architecture` I generalize the "ingress" reference to match the image while on the how-to I mentioned that we are using NGINX for this example. Once we add support for the other ingress, this can be updated to reflect the recommended ingress charm.

are deployed.

To allow the Testflinger server to communicate with the MongoDB database we
need to setup a cross-model relation. This is achieved by offering the ``database``
endpoint from the machine model and consuming it in the K8s model as a SAAS 
application. The Testflinger server charm is then related with both
the ingress charm and the MongoDB SAAS via `Juju Integration <Juju Integration_>`_ 
to enable API access and database connectivity. For a more detailed guide
on how the cross-model relation is set up, please refer to the 
`Juju How to Manage offers guide <Juju Offers Guide_>`_.

Prerequisites
-------------

The following prerequisites cover the necessary steps to set up K8s and
machine-based Juju environments required for the Testflinger server
deployment. For a detailed guide on how to set up Juju, refer to the
`official Juju documentation <https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/>`_.

Dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install the following dependencies:

.. code-block:: shell

  $ sudo apt-get install git

>   $ sudo snap install juju lxd

Reviewer: When running `sudo snap install juju lxd` it appears only to execute `sudo snap install juju` and `lxd` is not installed -- do we need to install lxd?  Was that intended to be some other meaning?

Author: Hmmm that is strange... Just tried it with a VM and its working, both are needed:
```
root@ubuntu:~# sudo snap install juju lxd
juju (3/stable) 3.6.23 from Canonical✓ installed
lxd (5.21/stable) 5.21.4-aee7e08 from Canonical✓ installed
```

This should work as long as they have the same confinement

>   $ sudo snap install microk8s --channel 1.32-strict

Reviewer: Is this only for the current, i.e. a specific, version of juju?  Should we also be specifying that version?

Author: The version is not necessary, only the `strict` version is needed. It could be a greater version (latest is `1.36-strict/stable`) but there is no `latest-strict/stable` channel :(

Reviewer: Ah! I think it might be because I had already installed juju?
```
ubuntu@primary:~$ sudo snap install juju lxd
snap "juju" is already installed, see 'snap help refresh'
ubuntu@primary:~$ sudo snap install lxd
lxd (5.21/stable) 5.21.4-aee7e08 from Canonical✓ installed
```

Reviewer 2: This version number can quickly become unmaintainable. How about using a placeholder like `<latest_version>-strict`?

Author: Added the placeholder as suggested

  $ sudo snap install terraform --classic

.. note::

>   Juju requires the strict version of the ``microk8s`` snap to be installed.

Reviewer: Let's capture the specific thing that is causing this limitation.  I am only guessing here.

```suggestion
  Juju 3.6 requires the strict version of the ``microk8s`` snap to be installed.
```

Author: Makes sense, its Juju 3.x as per https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/2.9/reference/cloud/list-of-supported-clouds/the-microk8s-cloud-and-juju/#microk8s-snap. I'll update

Author: Added in [b0cec17](https://github.com/canonical/testflinger/pull/1109/commits/b0cec17dfad3efd98ef32c6e2b1f8bda8c9f989a)

LXD
^^^

Make sure LXD is initialized.

.. code-block:: shell

  $ lxd init --auto

.. note::

>   Feel free to initialize LXD with a configuration that suits your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Feel free to initialize LXD with a configuration that suits your needs. LXD is only used in this setup to deploy the machine charms, specifically the MondoDB machine charm.
```

Author: Added in [b0cec17](https://github.com/canonical/testflinger/pull/1109/commits/b0cec17dfad3efd98ef32c6e2b1f8bda8c9f989a)
